examples/composition/README.md, before:

# Supergraph Composition

The [Apollo Federation Docs](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/) do a great job explaining the basics of composition.

## Composition Concepts

The [concepts section](./concepts/) goes into additional details with composition examples.

## Composition in Apollo Studio

[Composition in Apollo Studio](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/quickstart/studio-composition) enables multiple teams to independently publish their subgraph schemas after an updated subgraph has been deployed, and provides a supergraph CI/CD pipeline with and schema check that can assess the impact of a change using graph-native telemetry from your supergraph router. Composition in Apollo Studio supports [Contracts](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/studio/contracts/) which allows you to create slices of a unified graph (public API, partner API, internal API) for different consumers to use.

Doing local development with your own graph variant (like a branch in GitHub) enables you to see composition errors and browse your schema in Apollo Studio before deploying them to a production supergraph and provides a great developer experience.

## Local Composition

Local composition using `rover supergraph compose` is also covered [here](./local/) for simple local development use cases and air-gapped environments. However, in most cases [Composition in Apollo Studio](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/quickstart/studio-composition) is preferred even for local development as newly published subgraphs are composed and automatically deployed to your local supergraph router which is listening for changes, so the supergraph automatically updates whenever you `rover subgraph publish` a new schema to the schema registry.

Commit message:

add local composition examples
Signed-off-by: Phil Prasek <prasek@gmail.com>

examples/composition/README.md, after:

# Supergraph Composition

The [Apollo Federation Docs](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/) do a great job explaining the basics of composition.

## Composition Concepts

The [concepts section](./concepts/) goes into additional details with composition examples.

## Composition in Apollo Studio

[Composition in Apollo Studio](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/quickstart/studio-composition) enables multiple teams to independently publish their subgraph schemas after an updated subgraph has been deployed, and provides a supergraph CI/CD pipeline with and schema check that can assess the impact of a change using graph-native telemetry from your supergraph router. Composition in Apollo Studio supports [Contracts](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/studio/contracts/) which allows you to create slices of a unified graph (public API, partner API, internal API) for different consumers to use.

Doing local development with your own graph variant (like a branch in GitHub) enables you to see composition errors and browse your schema in Apollo Studio before deploying them to a production supergraph and provides a great developer experience.

Most of the examples in this repo use [Composition in Apollo Studio](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/quickstart/studio-composition) which has some nice developer tooling that is [free for all Apollo users](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/studio/#free-for-all-apollo-users).

You can even use many of Studio's dev tools without an Apollo account using [Apollo Sandbox](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/studio/explorer/sandbox/). Apollo Router provides an embedded version of Sandbox using `router --dev` mode that can even show the query plans from the Router!

## Local Composition

Local composition using `rover supergraph compose` is also covered [here](./local/) for simple local development use cases and air-gapped environments. However, in most cases [Composition in Apollo Studio](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/quickstart/studio-composition) is preferred even for local development as newly published subgraphs are composed and automatically deployed to your local supergraph router which is listening for changes, so the supergraph automatically updates whenever you `rover subgraph publish` a new schema to the schema registry, typically after the subgraph has been updated with schema updates that need to be composed into your supergraph.
